                                                United States History and Government
                                              Content-Specific Rubric (Questions 31-36)
                                             Civic Literacy Essay Question (Question 37)

                                                                 August 2025

                                                                          Go on to the next page Æ

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Aug. '25  [31]
Document 1a

                                             InsurancCeo. Standard            CGoa.s
                                                            Oil Co.                          SBaavinnkgs

                                                         SOmil aClol .

                                             Source: Frank Beard, The Judge, July 19, 1884 (adapted)

Document 1b

              . . . In my Message to the present Congress at its first session I discussed at length
              the question of the regulation of those big corporations commonly doing an interstate
              business, often with some tendency to monopoly, which are popularly known as
              trusts. . . . We can do nothing of good in the way of regulating and supervising these
              corporations until we fix clearly in our minds that we are not attacking the corporations,
              but endeavoring to do away with any evil in them. We are not hostile to them; we are
              merely determined that they shall be so handled as to subserve [serve] the public good.
              We draw the line against misconduct, not against wealth. . . .

                   No more important subject can come before the Congress than this of the regulation
              of interstate business. . . The power of the Congress to regulate interstate commerce is
              an absolute and unqualified grant, and without limitations other than those prescribed
              by the Constitution. The Congress has constitutional authority to make all laws necessary
              and proper for executing this power, and I am satisfied that this power has not been
              exhausted by any legislation now on the statute books. It is evident, therefore, that evils
              restrictive of commercial freedom and entailing restraint upon national commerce fall
              within the regulative power of the Congress, and that a wise and reasonable law would
              be a necessary and proper exercise of Congressional authority to the end that such evils
              should be eradicated. . . .

                               Source: President Theodore Roosevelt, Second Annual Message to Congress, December 2, 1902

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Aug. '25                             [32]
31 Based on these documents, what is one historical circumstance surrounding the
    government regulation of business?

Score of 1:
    · States a historical circumstance surrounding the government regulation of business, based
         on these documents
         Examples: Standard Oil Company taking over many different aspects of business/smaller
                      oil companies; big corporations/trusts doing interstate business often have
                      some tendency to monopoly; corporations might have some evil/misconduct
                      in them, which needs to be done away with; corporations need to serve public
                      good; Congress has power to regulate interstate commerce except for
                      limitations prescribed by Constitution; evils restrictive of commercial
                      freedom/entailing restraint upon national commerce fall within regulative
                      power of Congress

Score of 0:
    · Incorrect response
         Examples: small oil companies putting Standard Oil Company out of business; Congress
                      has no power to regulate interstate commerce; the line must be drawn against
                      wealth

    · Vague response
         Examples: message to present Congress; question discussed at length; nothing of good can
                      be done; corporations need to be handled; make laws necessary and proper

    · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Aug. '25  [33]
Document 2

              . . . I deny emphatically the assertion that opportunity has been restricted or individual
              effort stifled by reason of the growth of the trusts. On the contrary, the trusts have opened
              wider avenues and greater opportunities to the young men of to-day than those of any
              other generation ever enjoyed. In the old days, before the union of interests, murderous
              competition made any business venture precarious; but aside from that, through lack of
              time, opportunity, and capital, the young man was kept within a very restricted field. It is
              combination that has produced the capital to open up mines and factories, to build great
              industrial plants and the monster wholesale and retail establishments. It is combination
              and capital that have sent the railroads shooting in a hundred different directions all
              over the continent. . . .

                   Yes, decidedly, the opportunities for the young American boy are greater to-day
              than they have ever been before; and no boy, however lowly--the barefoot country boy,
              the humble newsboy, the child of the tenement--need despair. I see in each of them
              infinite possibilities. They have but to master the knack of economy, thrift, honesty, and
              perseverance, and success is theirs.

                                               Source: J. D. Rockefeller, "Opportunity in America," Cosmopolitan, September 1, 1907

    32 What is one reason John D. Rockefeller believed that trusts were good for the country?

    Score of 1:
    · States a reason John D. Rockefeller believed that trusts were good for the country, based on

        this document
             Examples: growth of trusts has not restricted opportunity/stifled individual effort; trusts
                          opened wider avenues/greater opportunities to young men of today than those
                          of any other generation; before union of interests/murderous competition
                          made business ventures precarious; before union of interests lack of
                          time/opportunity/capital kept young men within very restricted field;
                          combination produced capital to open up mines/factories/build great industrial
                          plants/build monster wholesale/retail establishments/led to railroads being
                          established in a hundred different directions all over continent; all young boys
                          no matter how lowly have infinite possibilities/can find success

    Score of 0:
    · Incorrect response

             Examples: growth of trusts restricted opportunity/stifled individual effort; trusts have
                          limited opportunities for young men; mines/factories being closed; number of
                          railroads decreasing

    · Vague response
             Examples: assertion emphatically denied; on the contrary; murderous competition;
                          shooting in hundred different directions

    · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Aug. '25  [34]
Document 3

              . . . Journalism and publicity played important roles in promoting the goals of the
              progressives, especially with regard to corruption in government and the monopolistic
              practices of business and industry. During the period, scores of articles appeared in
              magazines--revealing the truth, as the reformers saw it--about the way America was
              really ruled. Novels were also written to expose evil. The use of journalism to further
              a social cause was made possible by new magazines of mass circulation, a number of
              them counting their readers in the hundreds of thousands. Such magazines included
              McClure's, Munsey's, Everybody's, Cosmopolitan, Collier's, and the American Magazine.
              The men and women who wrote these articles were called muckrakers, although the
              name was applied some time after they began their work. It was applied to them in 1906
              by Theodore Roosevelt who, while basically on their side, feared their revelations would
              get people too worked up and indignant. . . .

                              Source: Fon Boardman, America and the Progressive Era, 1900­1917, Henry Z. Walck, Inc., 1970

   33 Based on this document, what was one effort made to address the government
        regulation of business?

   Score of 1:
   · States an effort made to address the government regulation of business, based on this

        document
            Examples: journalism/publicity played important roles in promoting the goals of
                          Progressives; Progressives promoted goals with regard to corruption in
                          government/monopolistic practices of business/industry; scores of articles
                          appeared in magazines about the way America really ruled according to
                          reformers; novels written exposing evil; journalism used to further social
                          cause; mass circulation of new magazines; number of new magazines counted
                          readers in hundreds of thousands; new magazines included
                          McClure's/Munsey's/Everybody's/Cosmopolitan/Collier's/American
                          Magazine; work of muckrakers; Theodore Roosevelt basically supported
                          muckrakers

   Score of 0:
   · Incorrect response

            Examples: circulation of magazines decreased; Progressives/muckrakers became
                          inactive; journalists opposed the goals of Progressives; Progressives opposed
                          goals regarding corruption in government

   · Vague response
            Examples: important roles played; reformers saw it; social cause made possible; after
                          they began their work; America really ruled

   · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Aug. '25  [35]
Document 4
 The Northern Securities Company was a combination of three railroads that monopolized transportation
 in several western states. Theodore Roosevelt considered the company to be in violation of the Sherman
 Antitrust Act and, in 1904, the Supreme Court agreed.

              . . . More sophisticated than most Progressives, Roosevelt recognized that the large
              corporation was a fact of modern economic life and that a general rise in the standard
              of living depended far more on increased productivity than on radical redistribution of
              existing wealth. Rather than follow the common Progressive line that by their nature all
              trusts were inherently evil, he divided them into "good" and "bad" trusts. If a trust was
              charging fair prices and offering good service, he favored allowing it to continue. If it
              was restraining trade and jacking up prices, then it was evil. The line was to be drawn
              on conduct, not bigness. Roosevelt and Roosevelt alone decided which trust was good
              and which was bad, however. Northern Securities, he decided, was bad--and should be
              broken up. Roosevelt also advocated selective prosecutions because the government did
              not have enough lawyers to prosecute all monopolies and because he realized that the
              conservatism of the courts would make all prosecutions difficult. . . .

                   Specifically, Roosevelt called for the establishment of a Bureau of Corporations in a
              Cabinet-level Department of Commerce to determine if regulation was warranted--a
              program he had advocated as governor of New York. The bureau would provide the
              president with information on the trusts, which he could at his own discretion make
              public and present to the Justice Department as a basis for indictments. . . .

                                            Source: Nathan Miller, Theodore Roosevelt: A Life, William Morrow and Company, 1992

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Aug. '25  [36]
34 According to Nathan Miller, what was one effort made to address the government
    regulation of business?

Score of 1:
· States an effort made to address the government regulation of business, according to Nathan

    Miller
         Examples: Supreme Court agreed with Theodore Roosevelt that Northern Securities
                      Company in violation of Sherman Antitrust Act; recognition by Roosevelt that
                      large corporations a fact of modern economic life/general rise in standard of
                      living depended far more on increased productivity than on radical
                      redistribution of existing wealth; Roosevelt divided trusts into "good" and
                      "bad"; Roosevelt allowed trusts charging fair prices/offering good services to
                      continue; Roosevelt labeled trusts "evil" if restraining trade/jacking up prices;
                      Roosevelt drew line on conduct not bigness; Roosevelt and Roosevelt alone
                      decided which trusts good and which were bad; Roosevelt decided Northern
                      Securities should be broken up; Roosevelt advocated selective prosecutions of
                      trusts because government lacked enough lawyers to prosecute all monopolies
                      and conservatism of courts would make all prosecutions difficult; Roosevelt
                      called for establishment of Bureau of Corporations in cabinet-level
                      Department of Commerce; Bureau of Corporations would provide president
                      with information on trusts; information on trusts could be made public at
                      president's discretion; president could present information to Justice
                      Department as basis for indictments

Score of 0:
· Incorrect response

         Examples: general rise in standard of living did not depend on increased productivity;
                      Roosevelt labeled all trusts "bad"; Northern Securities one of the "good"
                      trusts; all trusts prosecuted

· Vague response
         Examples: Roosevelt advocated program as governor of New York; basis for
                      indictments; more sophisticated than most Progressives; common Progressive
                      line

· No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Aug. '25  [37]
Document 5

              . . . Roosevelt's brand of progressivism put him foursquare in the middle of the national
              mood: for while people wanted change, they did not want radical change, and while
              Roosevelt's reforms were progressive, they were a conservative sort of progressivism
              that policed more by threat than by action (it was TR who declared the presidency
              as a "bully pulpit"), more by regulation than by prosecution, and used power more
              symbolically and rhetorically than in fact. In a very public confrontation, Roosevelt did
              prosecute John D. Rockefeller and J. P. Morgan, two of the most celebrated titans of
              American business, for their railroad monopoly in the Northwest; he righteously took
              the side of labor and the consumer in the great coal strike of 1902; and by 1906, two
              years after he had been elected in his own right, TR increased the pace of reform by
              creating standards for food and drugs, tackling the corruption in the meat industry
              (in response to novelist Upton Sinclair's best-selling The Jungle), and, in the cause that
              he perhaps held dearest, aggressively limiting development of public lands (he would
              double the number of national parks and establish fifty-one wild bird refuges). . . .

                                                                              Source: Jennings and Brewster, The Century, Doubleday, 1998

   35 Based on this document, what is one result of efforts to address the government
        regulation of business?

   Score of 1:
   · States a result of efforts to address the government regulation of business, based on this

        document
             Examples: Roosevelt's reforms were a conservative sort of progressivism; Roosevelt's
                          reforms policed more by threat than by action/more by regulation than
                          prosecution/used power more symbolically/rhetorically than in fact; John D.
                          Rockefeller/J.P. Morgan prosecuted in public confrontation by Roosevelt for
                          railroad monopoly in Northwest; Roosevelt took side of labor/consumer in
                          great coal strike of 1902; Roosevelt created standards for food and
                          drugs/tackled corruption in meat industry/aggressively limited development of
                          public lands; Roosevelt doubled number of national parks/established fifty-
                          one wild bird refuges

   Score of 0:
   · Incorrect response

             Examples: Roosevelt did not prosecute John D. Rockefeller/J.P. Morgan; Roosevelt took
                          the side of the coal companies in the coal strike of 1902; aggressively sold
                          public lands/limited number of national parks

   · Vague response
             Examples: brand of progressivism; middle of the national mood; people wanted radical
                          change; public confrontation; Roosevelt held the cause dearest; elected in his
                          own right

   · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Aug. '25  [38]
Document 6

              . . . America's prosperity is built on hard work, open markets, and fair competition.
              But right now we're facing a monopoly problem as dominant digital platforms like
              Amazon increasingly use their power to increase prices, preference their own products
              and services, and harm small businesses. These anticompetitive practices are bad
              for consumers, entrepreneurs, and businesses, and I commend the Federal Trade
              Commission for taking action.

                   The case for reinvigorating competition policy and putting in place rules of the road
              for Big Tech companies is clear. I will continue to push for updates to the antitrust laws,
              including the bipartisan American Innovation and Choice Online Act, to strengthen our
              economy and make sure consumers can get the fair treatment they deserve.

                                                Source: Senator Amy Klobuchar, Statement on the Antitrust Lawsuit Against Amazon,
                                                                                                                                        September 26, 2023

   36 According to this document, what is one result of efforts to address the government
      regulation of business?

   Score of 1:
   · States a result of efforts to address the government regulation of business, according to this

         document
            Examples: in 2023 America still facing monopoly problem; dominant digital platforms
                          like Amazon increasingly use power to increase prices/preference own
                          products/services/harm small businesses; use anticompetitive practices which
                          is bad for consumers/entrepreneurs/businesses; Federal Trade Commission
                          has taken action against Amazon; case for reinvigorating competition
                          policy/putting in place rules of road for Big Tech companies clear; Senator
                          Amy Klobuchar continues to push for updates to antitrust laws/ bipartisan
                          American Innovation and Choice Online Act to strengthen the economy/make
                          certain consumers get fair treatment they deserve; antitrust lawsuit brought
                          against Amazon

   Score of 0:
   · Incorrect response

            Examples: America has solved monopoly problem; Federal Trade Commission refuses
                          to take action; antitrust laws have been eliminated; Senator Amy Klobuchar
                          ended her push for updates to antitrust laws

   · Vague response
            Examples: America's prosperity built on hard work/open markets/fair competition; Big
                          Tech companies are on a road; digital platforms used by Amazon

        · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Aug. '25  [39]
