                                 United States History and Government
                                Part A Specific Rubric (Questions 31-36)

                                             Civic Literacy Essay
                                                  January 2025

Document 1
During World War I, President Woodrow Wilson announced his 14 Points, which he hoped would
be included in the Treaty of Versailles.

       "I [Woodrow Wilson] can predict with absolute certainty that within another generation
       there will be another world war if the nations of the world do not concert the method
       [agree to a plan] by which to prevent it."

            Once Wilson knew that the U.S. would be unable to avoid entering the war, he
       worked to find a way to stop such a war from happening again. In January 1918 he
       announced the 14 Points, a set of principles designed to remove the causes of another
       great war. The 14 Points included an international organization to keep the peace,
       by providing a place where disputes could be discussed and mediated. The 14 Points
       inspired the peoples of the Allied Nations and gave them hope that another great war
       could be prevented. When Wilson traveled to Europe in late 1918 to attend the Paris
       Peace Conference, he was met by crowds numbering in the millions in Britain, France
       and Italy.

            At the Peace Conference in 1919, Wilson moved the seat of the presidency to Paris
       for six months while he commanded the attention of the world. He was faced with
       the leaders of the Allied Nations determined to win as many concessions and as much
       territory as they could for their countries. Wilson argued and fought with them through
       June of 1919 to make as fair a treaty as possible under the circumstances. Wilson drew
       up terms of peace including his design for a League of Nations, a world body to settle
       future conflicts among nations. . . .

                                                Source: "League of Nations," The President Woodrow Wilson House (adapted)

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '25  [4]                                                                           Vol. 2
31 Based on this document, what is one historical circumstance surrounding the ratification
    of the Treaty of Versailles?

Score of 1:
    · States a historical circumstance surrounding the ratification of the Treaty of Versailles
         based on this document
         Examples: Wilson proposed including the 14 Points/League of Nations in the Treaty of
                      Versailles; Wilson feared there would be another world war within the next
                      generation if nations of world did not agree on plan to prevent it; unable to avoid
                      entering World War I, Wilson worked on a plan to avoid future wars; inclusion
                      of international organization in 14 Points gave Allied nations hope that another
                      great war could be prevented; 14 Points included a place where disputes could
                      be discussed/mediated; inclusion of world body to settle future conflicts among
                      nations, including a design for a League of Nations drawn up by Wilson; during
                      the peace conference, Wilson moved the seat of the presidency to Paris for six
                      months; Wilson fought to make a fair treaty, despite the determination of Allied
                      nations to win as many concessions/territories as they could

Score of 0:
· Incorrect response

         Examples: United States refusing to enter World War I; 14 Points was the United States'
                      organization to keep peace; 14 Points caused the war; Allied nations not
                      interested in getting territory

· Vague response
         Examples: predicted with absolute certainty; Wilson worked to find a way; Wilson argued
                      and fought with them

· No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '25  [5]                                                           Vol. 2
Document 2
   After discussing the proposed treaty provisions relating to the League of Nations with President
   Woodrow Wilson, Senator Henry Cabot Lodge gave an address to the United States Senate on
   February 28, 1919.

          . . . Animated by the conviction that he would "follow no man and vote for no measures
          which, however well intended, seem in my best judgement to lead to dissensions
          [disagreements] rather than to harmony among the nations or to injury, peril, or injustice
          to my country," and his insistence that the Senate, "which is charged with responsibility. . .
          should investigate every proposal with the utmost thoroughness," Lodge's address was
          a painstaking critique of the League's constitution. He began with the impassioned
          argument that the document repudiated [contradicted] George Washington's
          September 17, 1796, Farewell Address and the Monroe Doctrine, two sacred canons
          [principles] of American foreign policy. "I ask the press and the public and, of course,
          the Senate to consider well the gravity of this proposition," Lodge pleaded, "before
          it takes the heavy responsibility of finally casting aside these policies which we have
          adhered to for a century and more and under which we have greatly served the cause of
          peace both at home and abroad."

               Turning to the specific provisions of the proposed draft, Lodge argued that the
          provision guaranteeing the independence and territorial integrity of all members
          was particularly troubling. He warned that, to insure that guarantee, the United States
          "must be in possession of fleets and armies capable of enforcing them at a moment's
          notice." . . .

           Source: "Henry Cabot Lodge: Constitution of the League of Nations," Classic Senate Speeches, U.S. Senate

32 Based on this document, what is one historical circumstance surrounding the debate
    over ratification of the Treaty of Versailles?

Score of 1:
· States a historical circumstance surrounding the debate over ratification of the Treaty of

    Versailles based on this document
         Examples: it contradicted George Washington's Farewell Address/Monroe Doctrine; it
                      would cast aside policies we have followed for a century that have greatly
                      served the cause of peace, both at home and abroad; provision guaranteeing
                      independence and territorial integrity of all members troubling; United States
                      would have to be in possession of fleets and armies capable of enforcing
                      provisions at moment's notice; insistence that Senate should investigate every
                      proposal with thoroughness

Score of 0:
· Incorrect response

         Examples: included ideas from Washington's Farewell Address/Monroe Doctrine; the
                      Senate was not thorough in its investigation; the United States could not have
                      an army

· Vague response
         Examples: animated by the conviction; a painstaking critique; arguments were
                      impassioned; gravity of the proposition, this document was different

· No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '25  [6]                                                                     Vol. 2
Document 3

        Again and again, my fellow citizens, mothers who lost their sons in France have come to
        me and, taking my hand, have shed tears upon it not only, but they have added, "God
        bless you, Mr. President!" Why, my fellow citizens, should they pray God to bless me? I
        advised the Congress of the United States to create the situation that led to the death of
        their sons. I ordered their sons oversea. . . . They believe, and they rightly believe, that
        their sons saved the liberty of the world. They believe that wrapped up with the liberty
        of the world is the continuous protection of that liberty by the concerted [united] powers
        of all civilized people. They believe that this sacrifice was made in order that other sons
        should not be called upon for a similar gift--the gift of life, the gift of all that died. . . .

             You will say, "Is the League an absolute guaranty against war?" No; I do not know
        any absolute guaranty against the errors of human judgment or the violence of human
        passion, but . . . I ask you this: If it is not an absolute insurance against war, do you want
        no insurance at all? Do you want nothing? Do you want not only no probability that war
        will not recur, but the probability that it will recur? The arrangements of justice do not
        stand of themselves, my fellow citizens. The arrangements of this treaty are just, but
        they need the support of the combined power of the great nations of the world. . . .

                                                 Source: President Woodrow Wilson, The Pueblo Speech, September 25, 1919

33 According to President Woodrow Wilson, why should the Senate approve the Treaty of
     Versailles?

Score of 1:
· States a reason the Senate should approve the Treaty of Versailles according to President

     Woodrow Wilson
         Examples: so mothers would not have to lose their sons who saved the liberty of the
                       world; the liberty of the world needs continuous protection of united powers
                       of all civilized people; would be insurance against errors of human
                       judgment/violence of human passion; would decrease the probability that war
                       will recur; treaty needs the support of the combined powers of the great
                       nations of the world; terms of treaty are just/fair

Score of 0:
· Incorrect response

         Examples: League is absolute guarantee against war; Congress declared war; it is an
                       unjust treaty; United States does not need to support the great nations of the
                       world

· Vague response
         Examples: arrangements of justice stand by themselves; insurance is not absolute; there is
                       no probability, it's better/good

· No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '25  [7]                                                                          Vol. 2
Document 4

      . . . Opposition in the Senate to the Covenant of the League of Nations, led by
      Republican Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, was directed in particular at Article X,
      which stated that members would "undertake to respect and preserve as against external
      aggression the territorial integrity and existing political independence of all Members
      of the League" and that "the Council shall advise upon the means." Many Americans
      believed with Lodge that through the treaty the United States would be committed to
      an "entangling alliance" and that other nations could determine its foreign policy by
      obliging it to participate in action against aggressors.

           Deciding that an appeal to the country would force the Senate into line for the
      necessary two-thirds vote, President Wilson traveled over 8,000 miles by train and spoke
      forty times in twenty-two days. He became ill, and was forced to abandon his appeal.
      Wilson never succeeded in mustering enough votes to have the treaty passed as he had
      originally proposed it. Yet his belief in the original proposal was so intense that he used
      his influence to keep his supporters from agreeing to the changes which could have
      brought passage. . . .

                              Source: Leonard F. James, American Foreign Policy, Scott, Foresman and Company, 1967

34 According to Leonard F. James, what is one reason Senator Henry Cabot Lodge
    opposed the League of Nations?

Score of 1:
· States a reason Senator Henry Cabot Lodge opposed the League of Nations according to

    Leonard F. James
         Examples: he did not like Article X; many Americans supported the belief that the United
                      States would be committed to entangling alliances; believed other nations
                      could determine United States' foreign policy; United States would be obliged
                      to participate in action against aggressors

Score of 0:
· Incorrect response

         Examples: President Wilson traveled more than 8,000 miles by train; Wilson became ill
                      and was forced to abandon his appeal; Wilson spoke 40 times in 22 days in
                      support of the League; Wilson used influence to keep supporters from
                      agreeing to changes; changes could have resulted in passage

· Vague response
         Examples: opposition was directed; foreign policy would be determined; original
                      proposal was intense; could have brought passage; it was bad

· No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '25  [8]  Vol. 2
Document 5a

Document 5b                                                                               Source: New York Tribune, March 20, 1920

                               This          The Gap in the Bridge
                      League of Nations

                              Bridge
                    was Designed by the

                       President of this
                              U.S.A

                                             Source: Leonard Raven-Hill, Punch (adapted)

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '25  [9]                                          Vol. 2
35 Based on these documents, what is one impact of the efforts to ratify the Treaty of
    Versailles?

Score of 1:
· States an impact of the efforts to ratify the Treaty of Versailles based on these documents

         Examples: Senate killed/defeated treaty; Democrats opposed treaty; vote for treaty 49 to
                      35 in Senate; United States did not join League of Nations; treaty returned to
                      Wilson after Senate defeat; without United States membership, the League of
                      Nations might not be successful; keystone of United States missing from
                      "League of Nations Bridge"; failure of United States to join League of
                      Nations created "Gap in the Bridge"

Score of 0:
· Incorrect response

         Examples: House of Representatives passed treaty; vote was 49 to 35 in favor of
                       treaty; Wilson passed the treaty

· Vague response
         Examples: gap in the bridge; keystone USA; bridge designed by the president; it
                      improved things

· No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '25  [10]                                                     Vol. 2
Document 6

      . . . In the end Wilson failed largely because the country had never really abandoned
      its isolationist predilections [preferences], particularly the assumption that the United
      States unaided could maintain its national security. During the war, these convictions
      were driven underground. It is astonishing that despite the tradition of isolation, despite
      Wilson's collapse, despite partisan bitterness and the animosity of ethnic groups, 85 per
      cent of the senators voting on November 19 were willing to accept the League in some
      form. Yet even if the country had entered the League, it is doubtful that Americans
      would have been willing to assume their full obligations. The United States had not been
      prepared by a threat to its own security for the kind of enterprise [action] it was later
      to undertake in Korea. It had insufficient incentive for abandoning either isolation or
      absolute national sovereignty. It would take the chastening experience of World War II,
      Hiroshima, and the Cold War to provide that incentive. . . .

   Source: William E. Leuchtenburg, The Perils of Prosperity: 1914­1932, The University of Chicago Press, 1993

36 According to William E. Leuchtenburg, what is one reason President Woodrow Wilson
    was not successful in gaining support for the Treaty of Versailles?

Score of 1:
· States a reason President Woodrow Wilson was not successful in gaining support for the

    Treaty of Versailles, according to William E. Leuchtenburg
         Examples: country had never really abandoned isolationist preferences; United States felt
                      it could maintain own national security; tradition of isolation; Wilson
                      collapsed; partisan bitterness; animosity of ethnic groups; not enough
                      incentive to abandon isolation/absolute national sovereignty

Score of 0:
· Incorrect response

         Examples: 85 percent of voting senators willing to accept League in some form; country
                      was ready to abandon isolation; Wilson not interested in national security;
                      United States could not maintain its own national security

· Vague response
         Examples: World War II/Hiroshima/Cold War provided experience; convictions were
                      driven underground; he did things wrong

· No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '25  [11]                                                               Vol. 2
