                                                United States History and Government
                                              Content-Specific Rubric (Questions 31-36)
                                             Civic Literacy Essay Question (Question 37)

                                                                January 2026

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '26  [30]
Document 1

              . . . The prohibition movement was an outgrowth of the temperance crusades of the
              first half of the nineteenth century. Hard drinking was almost the rule among the
              Fathers of the Republic. The per capita consumption of spirits in the early days was
              many times what it is now, and beer drinking was almost unknown. After the War of
              1812, there grew up in the New England States a large commerce in West Indian rum,
              which was consumed extensively, especially in Maine, supplementing the consumption
              of heavy liquors which were manufactured in those States. Maine alone, in 1827, when
              her population was 360,000, manufactured 1,333,160 gallons of liquor, and it was sold
              at retail in nearly every store and tavern. Drunkenness in its worst form, involving
              disastrous social consequences, was widespread. Sufficient evidence of it was to be
              found in the number of persons in the jails and poorhouses. . . .

                                                  Source: L. Ames Brown, "Prohibition," The North American Review, November 1915

   31 According to L. Ames Brown, what is one historical circumstance surrounding the issue of
         Prohibition?

    Score of 1:
    · States a historical circumstance surrounding the issue of Prohibition according to L. Ames Brown

             Examples: Prohibition movement outgrowth of temperance crusades of first half of 19th century;
                           hard drinking almost rule among Fathers of Republic; per capita consumption of
                           spirits in early days many times what it was in 1915; growth of large commerce in
                           West Indian rum in New England states after War of 1812; West Indian rum
                           consumed extensively, especially in Maine; heavy liquors manufactured in New
                           England states supplemented with West Indian rum; 1,333,160 gallons of liquor
                           manufactured in Maine in 1827 and sold at retail in nearly every store and tavern;
                           drunkenness involving disastrous social consequences widespread; jails and
                           poorhouses evidence of social consequences of drunkenness

    Score of 0:
    · Incorrect response

             Examples: temperance crusade outgrowth of Prohibition movement; increase in consumption of
                           spirits as compared to early days; beer consumed extensively in early days; heavy
                           liquors not manufactured in the United States; rum manufactured in New England

    · Vague response
             Examples: Prohibition movement outgrowth; Fathers of the Republic; per capital consumption;
                           New England states after War of 1812; consumption supplemented; Maine's
                           population 360,000 in 1827; it changed things

    · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '26  [31]
Document 2

                                             Source: Anti-Saloon League of America, 1919

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '26  [32]
32 According to this poster, what is one historical circumstance surrounding the issue of
     Prohibition?

 Score of 1:
 · States a historical circumstance surrounding the issue of Prohibition according to this poster

          Examples: as of January 31, 1919, only four states had not ratified Prohibition amendment; result
                       for ratification of Prohibition amendment expected to be unanimous; more than
                       twenty-five years of effort by Anti-Saloon League to ratify Prohibition; representation
                       by Anti-Saloon League of moral and religious forces of nation; work of Prohibition
                       forces to secure proper enforcement legislation from Congress and the states;
                       crystallization of public sentiment in large cities/wet districts for complete
                       enforcement of law needed; efforts of anti-liquor forces need to be redoubled for
                       larger task of world Prohibition

 Score of 0:
 · Incorrect response

          Examples: New Jersey only state not to ratify Prohibition; National Legislative Committee of
                       Anti-Saloon League of America repealed Prohibition; National Prohibition
                       amendment not ratified by western states

 · Vague response
          Examples: moral reform since Declaration of Independence; greatest victory for reform; vitally
                       essential task; larger task of the world; the states ratified this amendment in order

                     from 1 ­ 44

 · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '26  [33]
Document 3

              . . . Over his first three years in the White House Hoover never wavered in his support
              for Prohibition. In 1929 he signed the "Five and Ten Law" making every liquor violation
              a felony, and his Justice Department ramped up federal enforcement. "We enormously
              increased the jail population," by jailing Prohibition violators Hoover recalled in his
              memoirs. "We multiplied the fines, padlocking, and confiscations." Yet all this aggressive
              action he ascribed [attributed] to his duty as a constitutional officer, not to his actual
              endorsement. On this basic political question, Hoover declined to share his feelings and
              refused to act on them. . . .

                   During the 1928 campaign Hoover famously saluted Prohibition as "a great social
              and economic experiment, noble in motive and far-reaching in purpose." But three years
              later, surely the test had been run. . . .

                   By early 1932 little doubt remained as to the mood of the electorate. Respondents
              to a national mail-in survey conducted by The Literary Digest in February and March
              endorsed repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment by a four-to-one margin. Residents of
              Ohio, the birthplace of Prohibition, sent in 112,026 ballots for repeal and just 43,284 for
              keeping the ban on booze. Kansas was the only state to poll in favor of Prohibition. . . .

                              Source: Charles Rappleye, Herbert Hoover in the White House, Simon & Schuster, 2016 (adapted)

   33 Based on this document, what was one effort to address the issue of Prohibition?

    Score of 1:
    · States an effort to address the issue of Prohibition based on this document

              Examples: Hoover supported Prohibition in his first three years in the White House; Hoover
                           signed "Five and Ten Law" making every liquor violation a felony; Hoover's Justice
                           Department ramped up federal enforcement of Prohibition; Prohibition violators
                           jailed; Hoover used his duty as a constitutional officer to multiply
                           fines/padlock/confiscation; in his 1928 campaign Hoover saluted Prohibition as a
                           great social and economic experiment/noble in motive/far-reaching in purpose; by
                           early 1932 respondents to a national mail-in survey endorsed repeal of 18th
                           amendment by a four-to-one margin; residents of Ohio sent in 112,026 ballots to the
                           Literary Digest to repeal Prohibition and 43,284 for keeping it; Kansas only state to
                           poll in favor of Prohibition

    Score of 0:
    · Incorrect response

              Examples: federal enforcement of Prohibition ended; by early 1932 everyone supported
                           Prohibition; Kansas supported repeal of Prohibition; Hoover signed laws supporting
                           repeal of Prohibition

    · Vague response
              Examples: Hoover wavered; actual endorsement; basic political question; Hoover declined to
                           share his feelings; the test had been run; they tried to stop it

    · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '26  [34]
Document 4

              . . . The Women's Organization for National Prohibition Reform (WONPR) was founded
              in 1929 to show that not all women supported temperance. New York socialite Pauline
              Sabin led the charge after hearing Ella Boole, the Brooklyn-based leader of the Women's
              Christian Temperance Union, declare that her support for Prohibition represented
              "the women of America." On the heels of the successful suffrage campaign that won
              women the right to vote in 1920, the WONPR, and Sabin in particular, reflected the
              modern "new woman" of the 1920s. Many members of the WONPR had in fact initially
              supported the 18th amendment. But they had come to believe that Prohibition had led
              to a surge in unregulated and particularly underage drinking, as well as a growing sense
              of distrust for the rule of law. The WONPR's opposition to Prohibition, just like the
              18th amendment itself, was not only about drinking, but about the government's role in
              regulating behavior.

                   The WONPR did a lot of what we think of now as typical political campaign activities:
              members attended meetings and gave speeches at rallies, went door-to-door to recruit
              new supporters, used new technology to spread their message--at the time radio, and
              lobbied politicians. Wealthy women had founded the organization, and proved able to
              raise funds even after the Stock Market Crash of 1929 ushered in the Great Depression.
              From its headquarters in New York City, the organization also gained publicity by
              organizing events such as a motorcade through New York State. . . .

                                                         Source: Sarah Seidman, "The New York Women Who Dismantled Prohibition,"
                                                                                           Museum of the City of New York, December 15, 2015

34 According to Sarah Seidman, what was one effort to address Prohibition?

Score of 1:

· States an effort to address Prohibition according to Sarah Seidman
         Examples: Women's Organization for National Prohibition Reform (WONPR) founded in 1929
                      to show not all women supported temperance; Ella Boole/leader of Women's
                      Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) declared her support for Prohibition
                      represented "the women of America"; many members of WONPR initially supported
                      18th amendment; many members of WONPR came to oppose Prohibition believing it
                      had led to surge in unregulated/underage drinking/growing sense of distrust for rule
                      of law; WONPR opposed Prohibition on grounds of government's role in regulating
                      behavior; WONPR attended meetings and gave speeches at rallies/went door-to-door
                      to recruit new supporters/used new technology/radio to spread message/lobbied
                      politicians/wealthy women raised funds/gained publicity by organizing events such as
                      a motorcade through New York State

Score of 0:

· Incorrect response
         Examples: suffrage campaign lost right to vote in 1920; many members of WONPR continued to
                      support 18th amendment; WONPR supported Prohibition and government's role in
                      regulating behavior

· Vague response
         Examples: New York socialite Pauline Sabin heard Ella Boole; reflected modern "new women"
                      of the 1920s; did a lot of what we think of as typical; stock market crash of 1929; as
                      an organization they changed Prohibition

· No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '26  [35]
Document 5

              . . . The end of the Prohibition era marked the demise of a moral crusade meant to
              impose a uniform standard of social behavior in the United States. Unrealistic and
              unforgiving, Prohibition had allowed a vocal minority to regulate the personal habits of
              all Americans, especially those who lived and worked in cities like New York. While the
              desire of the dry crusade to uplift and improve the United States by banning alcohol and
              the saloon had in some ways been understandable in the Progressive era that spawned
              the Prohibition movement, the shortcomings of the dry crusade manifested themselves
              as soon as the dry experiment had begun. Anachronistic [outdated] and unworkable, the
              Prohibition experiment was ill suited to the diversity and dynamic of the modern United
              States, which by the 1920s had grown too large and too varied a nation to be governed
              by an impulse as intrusive as the dry crusade. Despite the force of federal law, the use
              of authoritarian tactics to enforce it, and the expenditure of millions of dollars a year, in
              fourteen years Prohibition succeeded neither in changing Americans' behavior nor in
              eliminating the problems caused by alcohol abuse. When Prohibition failed, and it did
              so spectacularly, it revealed the limits of moral reform movements, and specifically the
              paternalistic, prejudiced, and undemocratic ideals behind the dry crusade. . . .

                       Source: Michael A. Lerner, Dry Manhattan: Prohibition in New York City, Harvard University Press, 2007

   35 According to Michael A. Lerner, what has been one impact of the efforts to address
         Prohibition?

    Score of 1:
    · States an impact of the efforts to address Prohibition according to Michael A. Lerner

             Examples: demise of moral crusade meant to impose uniform standard of social behavior in
                           United States; Prohibition allowed vocal minority to regulate personal habits of all
                           Americans, especially those who lived and worked in cities such as New York;
                           shortcomings of Prohibition manifested themselves as soon as dry experiment began;
                           Prohibition outdated/unworkable; Prohibition ill-suited to diversity/dynamic of
                           modern United States; by 1920s United States grown too large/too varied to be
                           governed by Prohibition; in 14 years Prohibition did not change Americans'
                           behavior/eliminate problems caused by alcohol abuse despite force of federal law/use
                           of authoritarian tactics to enforce it/expenditure of millions of dollars a year; revealed
                           limits of moral reform movements; revealed paternalistic/prejudiced/undemocratic
                           ideals behind Prohibition

    Score of 0:
    · Incorrect response

             Examples: no effect on those who lived and worked in cities such as New York; Prohibition
                           eliminated problems caused by alcohol abuse; enforcement did not include
                           authoritarian tactics

    · Vague response
             Examples: marked the demise; allowed a vocal minority; saloon in some ways understandable in
                           Progressive Era; Progressive Era spawned Prohibition; it ended

    · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '26  [36]
Document 6
 Although President Franklin Roosevelt supported repeal of Prohibition, he wanted to ban the operation of
 saloons, bars, and taverns in the United States.

                                                   Source: New York Times, December 6, 1933

36 Based on this document, what is one impact of the efforts to address Prohibition?

Score of 1:

· States an impact of the efforts to address Prohibition based on this document
         Examples: Ratification of Prohibition repeal; support of President Franklin D. Roosevelt for
                      repeal of Prohibition/asks nation to bar operation of saloons/bars/taverns; quiet
                      celebration of repeal in New York; Utah ratification of Prohibition; crowds swamp
                      licensed resorts but legal liquor scarce; celebration in New York streets; closing of
                      many speakeasies; guarding of liquor supplies by machine guns; barring of state
                      house bootlegger in Maryland; certification of 21st amendment by Acting Secretary
                      of State Phillips; 21st amendment in effect on receiving three final states' votes

Score of 0:

· Incorrect response
         Examples: Utah failed to ratify 21st amendment; only three states ratified 21st amendment;
                      President Franklin Roosevelt opposed Prohibition repeal; many new speakeasies open

· Vague response
         Examples: final action at Capital; undue hilarity; only normal number of arrests; supplies to be
                      rushed out; society got better

 · No response                               [37]

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ Jan. '26
