Document 1

              . . . When the United States won its independence from Great Britain in 1783, one of
              its major concerns was having a European power on its western boundary, and the need
              for unrestricted access to the Mississippi River. As American settlers pushed west, they
              found that the Appalachian Mountains provided a barrier to shipping goods eastward.
              The easiest way to ship produce was to build a flatboat and float down the Ohio and
              Mississippi Rivers to the port of New Orleans, from which goods could be put on ocean-
              going vessels. The problem with this route was that the Spanish owned both sides of the
              Mississippi below Natchez.

                   In 1795 the United States negotiated the Pinckney Treaty with Spain, which
              provided the right of navigation on the river and the right of deposit [right to store
              goods until export] of U.S. goods at the port of New Orleans. . . . Spain was eager to
              divest [relieve] itself of Louisiana, which was a drain on its financial resources. On
              October 1, 1800, Napoleon Bonaparte, First Consul of France, concluded the Treaty of
              San Ildefonso with Spain, which returned Louisiana to French ownership in exchange
              for a Spanish kingdom in Italy. . . .

                        Source: "The Louisiana Purchase," Museum Gazette, National Park Service, December 1991 (adapted)

   31 Based on this document, what is one historical circumstance that led to the purchase of
         the Louisiana Territory?

   Score of 1:
   · States a historical circumstance that led to the purchase of the Louisiana Territory, based on

       this document
             Examples: major concern of United States after winning independence was having a
                          European power on western boundary/need for unrestricted access to
                          Mississippi River; Appalachian Mountains provided barrier to shipping goods
                          eastward; easiest way for western settlers to ship produce was to use Ohio and
                          Mississippi Rivers to get to port of New Orleans; goods could be put on
                          ocean-going vessels in New Orleans; Spain owned both sides of Mississippi
                          River below Natchez; Pinckney Treaty with Spain in 1795 provided right of
                          navigation on Mississippi River/right of deposit at port of New Orleans;
                          Louisiana returned to French ownership in Treaty of San Ildefonso in 1800

   Score of 0:
   · Incorrect response

             Examples: United States won independence from Great Britain in 1783; Appalachian
                          Mountains provided easy route for western settlers to ship goods eastward;
                          Pinckney Treaty negotiated with France/Napoleon; Louisiana was returned to
                          Spanish ownership in 1800

   · Vague response
             Examples: build a flatboat; Napoleon Bonaparte was First Consul of France; exchanged
                          for a Spanish kingdom in Italy; negotiations; the U.S. wanted more

   · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ June '25  [4]                                                                          Vol. 2
Document 2

              . . . Jefferson asked James Monroe, a former member of Congress and former governor
              of Virginia, to join [Robert R.] Livingston in Paris as minister extraordinary with
              discretionary powers to spend $9,375,000 to secure New Orleans and parts of the
              Floridas (to consolidate the U.S. position in the southeastern part of the continent). . . .

                   By the time Monroe arrived in Paris on April 12, the situation had, unknown to
              him, radically altered: Napoléon had suddenly decided to sell the entire Louisiana
              Territory to the United States. He had always seen Saint Domingue, with a population
              of more than 500,000, producing enough sugar, coffee, indigo, cotton and cocoa to fill
              some 700 ships a year, as France's most important holding in the Western Hemisphere.
              The Louisiana Territory, in Napoléon's view, was useful mainly as a granary for Saint
              Domingue. With the colony in danger of being lost, the territory was less useful. Then,
              too, Napoléon was gearing up for another campaign against Britain and needed funds
              for that. . . .

                                                         Source: Joseph A. Harriss, "How the Louisiana Purchase Changed the World,"
                                                                                                                     Smithsonian, April 2003 (adapted)

    32 According to Joseph A. Harriss, what is one historical circumstance that led to the
         purchase of the Louisiana Territory?

    Score of 1:
    · States a historical circumstance that led to the purchase of the Louisiana Territory, according

        to Joseph A. Harriss
             Examples: Jefferson asked James Monroe and Robert Livingston to spend $9,375,000 to
                          secure New Orleans and parts of the Floridas/consolidate United States
                          position in southeastern part of continent; Napoleon decided to sell entire
                          Louisiana Territory to United States; Louisiana was less useful to Napoleon as
                          Saint-Domingue was in danger of being lost; Napoleon needed money as he
                          was gearing up for another campaign against Britain

    Score of 0:
    · Incorrect response

             Examples: Saint-Domingue most important French holding in Western Hemisphere;
                          Saint-Domingue produced sugar/coffee/indigo/cotton/cocoa; Napoleon
                          decided to keep Louisiana Territory; Saint-Domingue used mainly as granary
                          for Louisiana; Britain needed money to fight Napoleon; Livingston was
                          minister to Paris

    · Vague response
              Examples: discretionary powers; situation radically altered; Monroe arrived in Paris;
                            things would be better for the United States

    · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ June '25  [5]                                                                                                        Vol. 2
Document 3

. . . While the deal [Napoleon's offer to sell the entire Louisiana Territory] was instantly
popular, there were problems. Negotiations would need to start with Great Britain and
Spain about shared boundaries. And there was a debate about whether and how such a
large property purchase was allowed under the Constitution.

    Jefferson took a strict, literal view of constitutional powers, meaning that specific
powers reserved for the President and Executive Branch needed to be spelled out in
the Constitution. The ability to buy property from foreign governments was not among
these powers listed [in] the Constitution. . . .

    Instead, Jefferson considered a constitutional amendment the only way to conclude
the deal with France. "The General Government has no powers but such as the
Constitution gives it," he wrote to John Dickinson in 1803. "It has not given it power of
holding foreign territory, and still less of incorporating it into the Union. An amendment
of the Constitution seems necessary for this.". . .

    Jefferson's cabinet, including James Madison, disagreed about the need for a
constitutional amendment. The President also had been assured earlier in the year by
Albert Gallatin, his Treasury Secretary, that any potential deal with France would be
permissible and implied under the Constitution's treaty-making provisions. . . .

    The debate in the Senate only lasted for two days. On October 20, 1803, the Senate
voted for ratification 24-7, and the treaty was signed on October 31, 1803. . . .

            Source: "The Louisiana Purchase: Jefferson's Constitutional Gamble," Constitution Daily,
                                                                               National Constitution Center (adapted)

33 Based on this document, state one way the constitutional issue raised by the Louisiana
     Purchase was addressed.

Score of 1:

· States a way the constitutional issue raised by the Louisiana Purchase was addressed, based on
   this document
         Examples: debate about whether/how such large property purchase would, be allowed
                      under Constitution; Jefferson believed he should use strict/literal view of
                      constitutional powers since specific powers reserved for president and
                      executive branch needed to be spelled out in Constitution; Jefferson
                      considered a constitutional amendment only way to conclude deal with
                      France; Jefferson assured by Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin that any
                      potential deal with France would be permissible and implied under
                      Constitution's treaty-making provision; Senate debated for two days;
                      discussion between president and cabinet members

Score of 0:

· Incorrect response
         Examples: Napoleon's offer instantly popular; negotiations ended with Great Britain and
                      Spain; amendment added to Constitution; Senate voted against ratification of
                      treaty; Senate debated for one day

· Vague response
         Examples: there were efforts; large property purchase; General Government no powers;
                      incorporating everything into Union; Jefferson's cabinet couldn't decide

· No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ June '25  [6]                                                                       Vol. 2
Document 4

              . . . While Jefferson and his followers were altering their political philosophy to
              accommodate Louisiana, the Federalists of New England, led by [Timothy] Pickering,
              were also doing an about-face, from broad to strict interpretation of the Constitution. In
              this way, they hoped to prevent the inclusion of Louisiana in the Union. . . .

                   Standing alone, New England Federalism began to attack the Louisiana Purchase
              on various grounds. . . . Much attention was given to the huge sum that was to be paid
              for this desolate wilderness. . . . There was concern among some that the French title
              to Louisiana was not clear and that an attempt to occupy this region would involve the
              United States in a war with Spain, from whom France had obtained Louisiana. Other
              voices of New England Federalism urged that the purchase was unconstitutional, that
              the general government did not have the power to acquire foreign territory. . . .

                   When Jefferson called a special session of Congress in October, 1803, to consider
              the Louisiana treaty, Pickering and his fellow Federalists in Congress proceeded to
              Washington with much determination to defeat the agreement. Their attack was to be
              launched on constitutional grounds. . . .

                       Source: Thomas J. Farnham, "The Federal-State Issue and the Louisiana Purchase," Louisiana History:
                                                                         The Journal of the Louisiana Historical Association, 1965 (adapted)

    34 According to Thomas J. Farnham, what is one effort by Federalists to oppose the
         Louisiana Purchase?

    Score of 1:
    · States an effort by Federalists to oppose the Louisiana Purchase, according to Thomas J.

        Farnham
             Examples: Federalists and Pickering changed from broad to strict interpretation of
                           Constitution; attacked huge sum being paid for desolate wilderness; expressed
                           concern that French title to Louisiana not clear and attempt to occupy region
                           would involve United States in war with Spain; urged that purchase was
                           unconstitutional/general government did not have power to acquire foreign
                           territory; went to special session of Congress determined to defeat Louisiana
                           treaty on constitutional grounds; Federalists attacked on constitutional
                           grounds

    Score of 0:
    · Incorrect response

             Examples: changed from strict to broad interpretation of Constitution; expressed concern
                           that attempt to occupy would involve United States in war with Great Britain;
                           refused to attend special session of Congress called by Jefferson; France
                           obtained Louisiana from Spain

    · Vague response
             Examples: Timothy Pickering; about-face; stood alone; concern among some; voices of
                           New England Federalism; they met to change things

    · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ June '25  [7]                                                                                              Vol. 2
Document 5a

                      The Louisiana Purchase and Western Exploration

                                    Lewis and                                      BRITISH                               N
                                    Clark, 1805                                                                    W

                                                                                                                                        E        Maine

                                                                                                                                             (part of Mass.)

                                    OREGON              R                                                                     S         Vermont  New
                                                                                                                         ANISH                   Hampshire
                                    REGION
             PACIFIC                                                                    issour, i1R8.04                          New York Massachusetts
             OCEAN                                                          Lewis and Clark M      Michigan
                                                                                                   Territory                                     Rhode
                                                         ocky Mts.LOUISIANA                                                                      Island
                                                           TERRITORY
                                                                                                                              Pennsylvania       Connecticut

                                                                                                   Indiana      Ohio                         New Jersey
                                                                                                   Territory
                                                                                                                                             Delaware
                                               SPANISH
                                             TERRITORY                             St. Louis                                  Virginia       Maryland

                                                                                   Mississippi R.        Kentucky                    North
                                                                                                   Tennessee                       Carolina
                                                                                                                               South
                                                                                                                              Carolina       ATLANTIC
                                                                                                                                              OCEAN
                                                                                                   Mississippi  Georgia
                                                                                                    Territory

                                                        Boundary in Dispute,                           SP
                                                              1803­1819
                                                                                     New
0                     300 miles                                                    Orleans

0            300 kilometers                                                        Disputed between
                                                                                    U.S. and Spain,
             Azimuthal Equidistant                                                     1803­1819
                     projection

                      Lewis and Clark                                                              Gulf of Mexico

             Source: Joyce Appleby et al., The American Journey, Glencoe McGraw­Hill, 2003 (adapted)

Document 5b

              . . . Most people had a mental picture of what a normal country size should be. They
              were accustomed to smaller ones, as in Europe. The United States suddenly seemed in
              danger of becoming clumsily huge, as a giant would appear among men. Nearly nine
              hundred thousand square miles of almost virgin territory was emptiness indeed, and at
              first, it had seemed to fill hardly at all. Most of it was still a wilderness, largely uninhabited
              and not yet demanding much governance; this was not an immediate concern, only a
              fear for the future. But for a time, the fear was shared by many Americans. . . .

                   The enormous expanse to the north and west of New Orleans, the key city that had
              been the primary object of the Louisiana Purchase, meant that thirteen new states would
              eventually be created, in whole or in substantial part, from the eight hundred seventy-
              five thousand square miles that had been bought. These, ascending from the Gulf of
              Mexico to the Canadian border, are Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Missouri, Kansas,
              Iowa, Nebraska, Minnesota, South Dakota, North Dakota, Colorado, Wyoming, and
              Montana. Their movement into statehood would take most of the nineteenth century,
              but during that period, there was little question that the people of the east were part of
              the process. Even those who never planned a trip to the west coast thought of it as part
              of their country, and most would have fought to defend it. . . .

                                                 Source: Charles A. Cerami, Jefferson's Great Gamble, Sourcebooks, 2003 (adapted)

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ June '25                                   [8]                                                                             Vol. 2
35 Based on these documents, what is one impact of the Louisiana Purchase on the United
     States?

Score of 1:
· States an impact of the Louisiana Purchase on the United States, based on these documents

         Examples: doubled size of United States/changed size of United States; part of southern
                      boundary disputed with Spain; gave United States the port of New Orleans;
                      many Americans feared it was too big/still wilderness/largely uninhabited;
                      nearly nine hundred thousand square miles of virgin territory; it gave United
                      States land between Canada and Gulf of Mexico; it would mean 13 new states
                      eventually created (Louisiana; Arkansas; Oklahoma; Missouri; Kansas; Iowa;
                      Nebraska; Minnesota; South Dakota; North Dakota; Colorado; Wyoming;
                      Montana); most people thought of it as part of their country; most would fight
                      to defend it; it led to boundary disputes with Spanish; it extended United
                      States from Ohio River west to Rocky Mountains; Lewis and Clark expedition
                      explored lands west of Mississippi River; exploration of northern part of
                      Louisiana territory

Score of 0:
· Incorrect response

         Examples: it went to Pacific Ocean; caused problems with France; gave United States
                      more land on Atlantic; totally uninhabited

· Vague response
         Examples: Spain owned Florida; provided mental picture; clumsily huge; took much of
                      19th century

· No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ June '25  [9]                                                      Vol. 2
Document 6

 Many historians have written about the Louisiana Purchase and its impact.

                   The Louisiana Territory was the great unknown. There were fewer facts [than]
              fantasy about it. What was clear at the time of the Louisiana Purchase was that it had
              put America on the road to becoming a truly continental power. . . .

                   Historian Henry Adams wrote: "The annexation of Louisiana was an event so
              portentous [considerable] as to defy measurement; it gave a new face to politics, and
              ranked in historical importance next to the Declaration of Independence and the
              adoption of the Constitution--events of which it was the logical outcome; but as a
              matter of diplomacy it was unparalleled, because it cost almost nothing." The Louisiana
              Purchase changed America's shape and destiny--but also affected international
              relations. . . .

                   Although the Louisiana Purchase provided the structure for the nation's expansion,
              it also provided the seeds for its potential destruction. Historian Sean Wilentz wrote:
              "Over the coming decades, the consequences of the Purchase would indeed disturb
              public opinion over constitutional issues connected to the expansion of slavery--and
              help rip the country to pieces." . . .

                                                Source: "The Louisiana Purchase: Aftermath," The Lehrman Institute online (adapted)

    36 Based on this document, state one impact of the Louisiana Purchase on the United
          States.

    Score of 1:
    · States an impact of the Louisiana Purchase on the United States, based on this document

             Examples: put America on road to becoming continental power; according to historian
                           Henry Adams it gave new face to politics and ranked in historical importance
                           next to Declaration of Independence/adoption of Constitution; as matter of
                           diplomacy was unparalleled; changed America's shape/destiny; affected
                           international relations; provided structure for nation's expansion; provided
                           seeds for potential destruction of United States; divided public opinion over
                           constitutional issues connected to expansion of slavery; provided seeds for
                           Civil War

    Score of 0:
    · Incorrect response

             Examples: led to adoption of Constitution; destroyed international relations; unified
                           public opinion over constitutional issues; stopped nation's expansion

    · Vague response
             Examples: portentous event; put America on a road; provided seeds; had consequences; it
                           was connected; logical outcome; made things better/made things worse

    · No response

U.S. Hist. & Gov't. Rating Guide ­ June '25  [10]                                                                                    Vol. 2
